[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: It
appears Western civilization
has been operating under a
fallacy at a deeply fundamental
level-- the notion of
survival of the fittest,
or survival through competition.
You don't need to look far
to see where this mindset has
taken us, beginning
with Wall Street
and the world of politics.
But this is equally damaging
on the most personal levels.
According to Lynne McTaggart,
author of "The Bond."
And Lynne joins us today.
And first of all, before we
go anywhere else with this,
I have to say, this
is a must read.
This is really a must read.
If you're look-- it's how to
fix your following down world.
I think everyone of us can
relate to that subtitle.
And part of the
attraction to this for me
is that you're steeping
it, as always, in science.
And last time I sat with you,
we were doing the interview
on "The Intention Experiments."
And now we're going into--
we're segue waying into this.
But before we even go there,
Lynne, I would like to--
and you're everywhere.
This came in my mail.
You're everywhere.
You did a couple
interviews this morning
after coming in from
London last night.
But let's talk about
"The Fountainhead"
before we get into the
rest of this story.
Because that's really
a fascinating glimpse.
Why don't you do the background
to it, and why you put it
in this particular chapter.
>>LYNNE MCTAGGART: Well, we
in America, we in the west,
really revere our
lone wolf heroes.
You know, whether they come
in the guise of Nicolas Cage,
or Humphrey Bogart,
or even Superman,
the whole idea of the
individual with his fist up
against the establishment.
And I thought the
real epitome of this
was Howard Roark in the
movie, "The Fountainhead,"
or the-- which came from the
book, "The Fountainhead,"
by Ayn Rand.
And in that, Gary
Cooper is Howard Roark.
And he's the
uncompromising architect
who decides he wants to
build buildings his way.
So he builds-- he
designs a building that's
supposed to be a
public housing project.
And the people who
commissioned him change it.
They bastardize it.
And he's so incensed by
this that he blows it up.
And so he, of course,
is brought to trial
because he's destroyed
public property.
And he chooses to
defend himself.
And that gives Ayn
Rand the chance
to give him the mouthpiece
for her philosophy, which
is essentially an every
man for himself philosophy.
>>REGINA: It is.
And can I read that part?
>>MCTAGGART: Definitely.
>>REGINA: It's a quote from him.
It says, "The creator
who lives for his work
needs to no other men.
Wheeling around,
he faces the jury.
I do not recognize anyone's
right to one minute of my life,
nor any part of my
energy, no matter
who makes the claim,
how large their number,
or how great their need.
The integrity of a
man's creative work
is of greater importance than
any charitable endeavor."
That's a very strong statement.
And I have to say, when I saw
the movie, it's like yes, yes.
I mean, we all when we see this
and the way it was portrayed
and the way we've
been raised societally
and individually,
you think, yes.
One has to stand up for
one's artistic expression.
It can't be wiped out by
something more mundane.
But this is actually
dangerous thinking
from where you're sitting.
>>MCTAGGART: It's toxic
thinking, that I mean,
here's what happens in
the book and in the movie.
He gets acquitted despite
having blown up a city block.
He gets the girl.
He gets to build the
building his way.
And at the very end,
he's standing there
like the super colossus.
He's like the
Nietzschean Superman.
But my real point is he's the
perfect candidate for a heart
attack.
>>REGINA: Right.
Exactly.
And we are-- I just wanted to
use that as an illustration.
Because many people
have read the book,
or they have seen the
movie with Gary Cooper.
And it is a very
rousing, emotional moment
when he makes this speech.
And most people in the
west I think probably do
relate to it on an
emotional level.
And it's unconscious.
It's unconscious.
And yet, as we're going
to see when we go further
into this work here, that really
has-- that part of our thinking
has to die away to another
type of individuality
within a collective.
But first let's talk about it.
How did you go from "The
Intention Experiment"
into "The Bond?"
>>MCTAGGART: Well, there
were some big reasons
for doing this book, and
there were some small reasons.
First of all, I've
always felt from the time
I'd written "The Field" that
I had to write a book that
basically said, how do we
live what I'd discovered.
You know, I discovered that we
were all part of this larger
field, this larger energy field.
So I thought well, that
really contradicts everything
we think about who we are and
how we're supposed to live.
I also felt I needed to write
a bigger part of the story.
Because many things write
the story we live by.
But science is
really the thing that
writes the biggest chapter.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MCTAGGART: You know,
science defines who we are.
And from there, we determine
how we're supposed to live.
And the scientific
story thus far
has been a story of
individualism-- extreme
individualism.
You know, that life is full of
individual, very well behaved
things.
That's what Newton told us.
And then Darwin told
us that those things
are in competition
with each other.
And so from there, we've sort
of defined life as a race
to the finish line.
And that has pretty much
influenced everything
we do in our lives,
every structure we have.
Our educational model
is built on competition.
Our business model, our
financial model, competition.
Our neighborhood
model-- god forbid
your neighbor gets
a Mercedes when
you're still driving a Ford.
Even our relationships are
very competitive these days.
So the first question I had
was, is this the right story?
Was it supposed to be like this?
I also wanted to
try to figure out
why we're in the mess
we're in right now.
All we hear everywhere
is it's the end of this.
It's the end of that.
It's the end of capitalism.
>>REGINA: Just
reading the headlines
this morning. "Wall Street
Journal" and "New York Times."
It's enough.
The front page.
I can't read anymore.
>>MCTAGGART: No
>>REGINA: It's all falling down.
>>MCTAGGART: It's
all falling down.
And so our world
is falling down.
And you know, the
final reason I wrote
it was a very personal reason.
I have two daughters.
And one of my daughters
is a talented actress.
And she was given the main
role in her school play.
Suddenly, she was shunted
to a more minor role.
And I could never
find out the reason
until another girl let slip
that a third girl had lied when
a new director came
on board in order
to take over the role
given my daughter.
And I was appalled by this.
So I went to talk
to the mom about it.
And I brought it up tactfully.
And the mother just sort
of shrugged me aside
and said well, you
know, that's life.
And I was appalled by this until
I started thinking about it
and thought well, yeah.
This is the life we've
created for ourselves.
But as I said, is it's
supposed to be like this?
Is it all supposed to
be I win, you lose?
And so that got me looking into
not only physics this time,
but biology, anthropology,
all the "ologies."
And what I came
up with was no, it
wasn't supposed to be like this.
Nature-- Darwin was wrong.
Nature hasn't designed
us to compete.
Nature has designed us,
in every way, to connect.
In fact, nature
has designed us not
to be individual in any way.
>>REGINA: And we are,
whether we can understand it
through the lens that
we've been living through,
we are all very
deeply connected,
not just with each other
but with our environment,
with the cosmos.
And yet at the same time,
how many thoughts a day
do any one of us
have that put us
in direct competition
with somebody
else down to the
most mundane levels?
As you say in your book, we're
not really living who we are,
and that every day is set
up as a battleground for one
tiny competition after another,
to the point where no wonder
we have high blood pressure,
obesity, and everything else.
It is extremely
anxiety-producing
to put ourselves in this
mode of competition.
Talk about it on some of the
mundane levels we go through.
I love the way you
did it in your book.
Day in and day out, the ways in
which we're ready to do battle.
>>MCTAGGART: Well, you know, we
have a metaphor of ourselves,
or an image of ourselves as
the hero up against it all.
I mean, that's the way we do it.
And when you think about it,
we worry about everything
from the guy who's
going to usurp us
at our job, the kids who
are going to outperform us
at school when we're at school.
You know, what happens if
we're at the bottom of the bell
curve?
And these days in education,
they list who's, you know,
if you're in
medical school, they
list where you are in the
whole league basically.
And if you're in the
bottom, you know.
And it's, as I say,
your neighborhood.
That's become a ground of one
upmanship and competition.
Everything we do is
framed by competition.
Our conversations
with people are
very much about
picking the flaws
in someone else's arguments.
If somebody disagrees
with us, we're
taught, essentially,
to demonize them
but also to pulverize
them, to try
to destroy them
through our arguments.
The whole idea is about
being right, being first,
being individual.
That's been our programming.
If we have a hard drive, it's
been programmed with I win,
you lose.
And so what I'm saying is this
is absolutely against nature.
And that's why we're
in the mess we're in.
This is what selfish
looks like now.
Selfish looks like the breakdown
of every aspect of our society.
And that's what we're
going through right now.
>>REGINA: You're
absolutely right.
And I think one
very mundane example
of that is in America
certainly, road rage.
I don't dare-- in California,
I don't dare signal
to let anyone know I'm coming
into their lane anymore.
I just wait until I feel there's
a safe opportunity and go.
Because if you signal,
that is a direct assault
to the other person's space.
And they'll speed up.
I mean, this is common.
This is just common.
I was in traffic school once,
and I told them no, I never
signal.
And I told them why.
And the other people are
saying, yeah, you're right.
So that is how
fundamental it is.
We can't even let someone have
a little space on the road,
as though we own that
space just ahead.
That's sick.
>>MCTAGGART: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
But it's just become the
mindset that, as I say,
pretty much dictates
everything we do.
And so we have this big problem
on a giant collective level,
and we have this problem
on an individual level.
And it wasn't supposed
to be like this.
And in fact, when we
start living according
to the definition of who we
really are, and start wiping
that hard drive clean,
only then will we
evolve to another level.
Only then.
>>REGINA: And you say it's
about the last 250 years,
right, since this
paradigm has really
taken hold within our
psyche, maybe even less.
>>MCTAGGART: Yes.
I mean, there've always
been cases of people wanting
to be aggressive, or whatever.
Or societies where
people were in charge.
But prior to Newton,
we had much more
of a holistic view of ourselves
in relation to the cosmos.
Newton really essentially
ripped us out of that
and created a world
of individual things,
and really defined thingness.
And so it became a real
understanding of ours
that we end with the hair
on our skin, at which point
the rest of the universe begins.
And that, you know,
it's hard to understand
how much that
definition of ourselves
really informs how we operate,
because not all cultures do.
Many indigenous cultures
think very differently.
They think of themselves
as being all connected.
And from that, they create a
very different kind of society.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And quantum physics,
in this sense.
Really, when you
started doing research
for this book, where else can
you go but quantum physics
if you're going to look for
innate interconnectedness.
And you really, I think you
lay out the story very well.
And let's get into a
little bit about some
of the physics of
entanglement behind this,
without doing the whole thing.
I've done a couple other
interviews on entanglement
that people can go
to in the archives.
But for the purposes of
setting this up right now,
let's do a little bit on it.
>>MCTAGGART: OK.
Well, fundamentally, I mean our
idea about subatomic particles
are, as physics class has shown
us, little billiard balls.
You know, that's
what we think of.
But actually, a subatomic
particle is not that.
It's a vibrating packet of
energy, trading information
and energy with other subatomic
particles and this background
energy field.
So a subatomic particle is
essentially a shape shifter.
So when you look down at
matter at that tiny level, what
you find is there's no
such thing as a thing.
The unit of the
universe isn't a thing.
It's a relationship.
It's the relationship between
those subatomic particles.
And the other thing, as you
said, about subatomic particles
is once they're in
contact, you can move one
to New York and the
other one to Australia,
and they will continue to
be informed by each other.
Imagine they're twins
separated at birth.
Even though they never
see each other again,
because they were in contact--
let's say they're boys.
They both marry a
woman called Jane.
They both love the color blue.
And if one falls down
and breaks his leg,
the other one falls down
at the exact same moment
and breaks his leg too,
even though he's just
sitting there sipping
a latte in Starbucks.
So that's what a subatomic--
that's what entanglement
is essentially.
It's constantly being
affected by each other
over any time and any distance.
>>REGINA: And this isn't
just in the human population.
We have, I believe,
Clive Backster, right.
We have his work.
Is it Clive or Cleve?
>>MCTAGGART: Cleve.
>>REGINA: Cleve.
I always forget whether
it's Cleve or Clive.
His work with plants
and the same thing.
The fields effect on plants
on an emotional level,
plants responding to emotion.
We also have the work
by Rupert Sheldrake
about dogs who know when
their owners are coming home.
>>MCTAGGART: Yes.
I mean, when you start
factoring in both non-locality
and the whole idea of
a quantum energy field,
then that is a
wonderful, neat metaphor
to understand things
that-- connections
that occur between people or
between people and other living
things like plants across
time and across space.
That makes sense only
by factoring in a field.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And in your book, there's a
couple of really cute bits
where you talk about
your dog, Ollie.
I mean, I would
love to meet Ollie.
He sounds like quite a
character, a curmudgeon on one
hand and in another,
very generous.
>>MCTAGGART: Well, Ollie is--
Ollie was also an inspiration.
He, by the way, has gone on
to the kennel into the sky.
>>REGINA: Aw, when
did that happen?
>>MCTAGGART: I know.
Just last September, sadly.
I know.
He was a darling.
He was a total character.
He's a Cavalier, King Ch-- he
was a Cavalier King Charles
Spaniel.
And they were bred
by royal decree.
And consequently,
a lot of that breed
are extremely sort of haughty.
They're very regal.
And Ollie was the
exception to the rule
in terms of dogs that know
when their owners come home.
Ollie knew when we were coming
home and could care less.
But Ollie was really
interesting for me,
because even though he didn't
have much time for humans,
Ollie was kind to
every dog on his walk.
And I watched him with our
next door neighbor, T-Bone,
who is a little girl
Affenpinscher, tiny little dog,
even smaller than him.
Ollie used to dig
holes under our fence
and stick bones under
there for T-Bone.
And when she came over, he
would raid our garbage bin
to find a chicken
carcass for her.
And he would let her
have his food first.
And he would roll
over and let her
win when they were
rough housing, just
to keep her in the game.
And I kept looking
at this and saying,
this isn't survival
of the fittest.
This isn't dog-eat-dog.
There's nothing dog-eat-dog
about Ollie's world.
You know he's a very
cooperative entity.
And so that also started me
thinking was Darwin right?
And again, the answer is,
overwhelmingly, he wasn't.
>>REGINA: He wasn't.
And OK, you say he could care
less when people came home.
But he did care if you
picked up his leash
or even thought about
his leash, right.
He was ready to go
if it was a walk.
>>MCTAGGART: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: He caught
the field on that one.
He was just not interested
in the rest of it.
You just said something a
moment ago about Darwin.
And when I've read some
various analysis of his work
in the later part of his life.
And some of it has
indicated-- most of it
has indicated that he actually
had a change of heart.
He was under the influence
of another academic early
in his life, and
he started buying
into this concept of
competition and life is war.
That's not where he ended up.
>>MCTAGGART: No.
He became much more aware of
and appreciative of cooperation
later in his life.
But early in-- he was
a man of his time.
And the time, at the time,
there was a lot of worry
about population
explosion and the idea
that there wasn't
enough to go around.
And he started thinking
about that and thought, yes.
Life must proceed and
evolve through struggle.
It must be a race
to the finish line.
And that really informed him.
He never actually came
up with the term survival
of the fittest.
That was a friend of his.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MCTAGGART: But
his ideas really
swept the globe, thanks to
the advent of mass printing.
And again, it's impossible to
over-appreciate Darwin's effect
on so many areas of society.
He really became a
justifying principle
for burgeoning industrial
capitalism, you know.
He became a justifying
principle for colonialism,
one race taking over
another for its own good.
He became a justifying principle
for sociopathic behavior.
Hitler loved Darwin.
You know, he was
just-- and that really
became our defining
model in a lot of ways
for our modern society.
>>REGINA: And yet, I will give
you an example of cooperation.
Let's go to the other extreme.
My son went to the Waldorf
School in Sacramento
and had this wonderful
teacher named Mr. Murray.
And you know the Waldorf system?
>>MCTAGGART: Very well.
>>REGINA: Yes, right.
And so the children have to
have direct communication
and relationship
with their teachers.
You shake hands going
in in the morning.
You shake hands going out.
But one thing that Mr.
Murray did with the class,
first through eighth,
those eight years
they're together, and--
is that he encouraged
them to help each
other, even on tests.
Not only that, but
with everything.
His feeling was if
you're lagging behind,
then have someone who
understands the subject well
help you out so
that everyone can
thrive within the classroom.
And watching what
happened over the years
with that group of
individuals was amazing.
I mean, most of them are quite
successful in their own right
at each of the different, widely
varied things they're doing.
But this is an example
where competition would not
have helped that group.
>>MCTAGGART: No, and
the studies looking
at everything from
education to business models
demonstrate that competition is
a dangerous and outmoded model
in many areas of our society.
Studies looking at students,
where A students are working
side by side with
C students, find
that both the A students
and the C students
do better by working together,
rather than being streamed
and pitted against each
other competitively.
Business-wise, the same thing.
I spoke to Jack
Canfield recently,
and he was telling me about how
one company he went to work for
had this very-- they had little
silos of groups of people
within the organization working
competitively with each other.
And this created such
a climate of fear
that it inhibited
innovation, compared
to their rival,
another company which
had the team work together as
the whole, the organization
worked together
as a whole, and be
rewarded as a whole for success.
>>REGINA: Very discreet of
you not to mention names.
Very well known, very
large corporations.
And that was a very interesting
experience and observation
on his part.
And of course, you can feel it.
When you have that fear going,
creativity simply cannot
thrive.
And then when you have
extreme fear going on,
you get something that
looks like Columbine.
And you wrote about this
a little bit in your book.
>>MCTAGGART: Yes.
>>REGINA: The t-shirt
on one of the shooters.
>>MCTAGGART: Well,
this is the thing.
Again, sociopathic behavior
looks to Darwinian stuff.
There are big websites
now that are all
about culling the population
of the lesser mortals.
And of the two shooters who
walked into Columbine High
and started blowing away
their classmates, one of them
was wearing a t-shirt that
said, "natural selection."
So that's the extremes to
which this idea goes to.
And it was, you know,
it happened at the time
with Darwin.
There was a great deal of
eugenics and that whole idea
of getting rid of
the sub normal.
And it was now justified.
There was a justifying
principle for it.
>>REGINA: Very sad but true.
Let's talk, again going back
to pop culture and the movie,
"A Beautiful Mind," John Nash,
who the movie was based on,
a real character in life,
played by Russell Crowe.
Let's talk about that
scene where he laid out
a case mathematically for
cooperation versus competition,
when all of the guys
were essentially
lusting after a blonde
girl who was surrounded
by her brunette girlfriends.
>>MCTAGGART: OK.
Well, this iconic
scene in that movie
has to do with-- you know, Nash
is a post graduate student,
and he's there with his
economist student friends.
And they're in the bar, and
a blonde and her friends,
her brunette friends, walk in.
And the boys are all sort of
deciding, saying, OK guys.
As Adam Smith says, we
do best for everyone
by looking after
number one, you know.
It's every man for himself here.
And Nash sort of is
shaking his head.
And he finally says, no.
Because if we all
go for the blonde,
we're going to block each other.
And no one will get her.
But if we go to
her friends then,
they won't want
anything to do with us
because no one wants
to be second best.
So what if no one
goes for the blonde,
and we all go to her friends.
Well, this is the only way
we're going to have a date.
This is the only way we all win.
And then he starts
thinking about it
and he goes, you know,
Adam Smith, what he said
was incomplete.
It's not that the
individual does best
by looking after number one.
The individual does best, the
best response to any situation
is what's best for the
individual and the group.
And with that, he walks out.
He says, Adam Smith was wrong.
And he goes, governing dynamics,
runs out, and thanks the blonde
for being the muse to
the theory that ended up
winning him the Nobel Prize.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
I love that story.
Very practical.
But a beautiful mind to be able
to put those pieces together
for us now.
And you have woven this
together with its impact
not just on whether you
get the babe or not,
but also onto our physical
health, our relationships
with each other, our
families, and so forth.
And just before--
we're going to take
a break in a couple minutes.
But before that, let's
introduce the subject
of Japanese individuals, the
Japanese culture, and heart
health.
I find it fascinating.
>>MCTAGGART: Well, you know
what's really interesting.
Again, we have this
idea that the whole idea
of the individual being
that what's best for us
is really promoting our own
life, and our own needs,
and looking out for number one.
But studies of the
Japanese have found
something really fascinating.
Epidemiologists, people
who look at populations,
have looked at what happens to
the Japanese when they move.
Because the Japanese are
a really strange culture.
They smoke like chimneys, but
they don't have heart disease.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MCTAGGART: So-- except
when they come to the US.
And some of them
get heart disease
that mimics just like the
rest of the population.
So these scientists
started studying this.
And they found that
among those who
didn't get heart disease, even
though they moved to America--
it was really fascinating.
It had nothing to do with diet.
It didn't matter whether they
ate a Big Mac and fries or tofu
and sushi.
What mattered, the only
thing that mattered,
was whether or not they
kept close social groups
that they had similar to what
they had in the old country.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MCTAGGART: So
these scientists,
these epidemiologists,
traveled to Japan
to try to find the X factor.
You know, what was the
missing X factor of health?
Why would that be a
buffer to ill health.
And the Japanese looked
at them and said well,
it's easy to tell.
You Americans, you're so lonely.
You even walk down
the street alone.
Anybody can see that.
>>REGINA: It's true.
Yes.
>>MCTAGGART: And that really
was a fascinating thing for me,
looking at the whole
need we have to belong.
Because scientists looking
at the opposite side, people
who commit suicide,
find that suicides
suffer from what
psychologists say--
call excessive individuation.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MCTAGGART: They feel left out.
And being left out is the one
thing that human beings cannot
bear.
>>REGINA: We cannot bear.
We suffer in all ways from that.
And we're going to come
back in just a minute.
And we're going
to talk about some
of the people that
suffer the most
as a result of
extreme individuation.
We'll be right back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA: Welcome back.
Just before we broke, we
were talking about suicides,
and I was explaining
that you would probably
be surprised to find out
where some of the highest
rates of suicides were.
>>MCTAGGART: A
group of scientists
got together with people looking
at the population and differing
populations.
And they wanted
to find out where
the most suicides
occurred in America.
And they assumed it would be
in the poorest neighborhoods.
So they looked.
And they did find that the most
suicides occur in the poorest
neighborhoods.
Then they wanted
to find out where's
the next group of suicides.
And it wasn't the next poorest.
It was actually in the
richest neighborhoods.
Richest neighborhoods in America
had the second highest rate
of suicide.
And what they found
when they started
looking why was that
it was the people who
made just a little bit less
than everybody else around them.
And that, again to
these scientists,
was another indication of
this lack of belonging,
people feeling like
financial outcasts.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MCTAGGART: And that becomes
something they can't bear.
>>REGINA: Well, and when you're
in that kind of social strata,
there's so much fear surrounding
not being able to keep up
or being perceived as
slightly less than.
I mean, it creates
tremendous amounts
of fear in these individuals.
And of course, a lot
of these suicides
are the ones that make
it to the evening news.
>>MCTAGGART: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And so it's not as
though we're not aware of it.
But as they say, it's
lonely at the top.
Well, I mean if you call that
the top, it's lonely indeed.
And I thought you made
a lovely case for that.
And there was another area
having to do with wealth.
And actually they're using MRIs
in brain activity, brain wave
activity, about fairness issues.
And we're going to get into
several examples of games
and such, and studies, and
experiments around this.
But one of the things
that intrigued me
was how the MRI
operated when you
had a wealthy, well off
individual, when they were
able to give some of what
they have to someone they
love, to their partner
or so, and what
happened to their
brain activity.
And what happened
when someone that
was on the lowest part of
the socioeconomic scale
was given what they felt
they were worth and due.
Very similar brain
activity, and this
had to do-- this
was interesting,
because it had to
do with what's fair
and our perceptions on a very
deep level of what's fair.
We're not living
in a fair culture.
>>MCTAGGART: No.
And scientists, as you say,
have discovered two things
that you talked about.
One is the idea of giving
feels as good to us
as eating or having sex.
You know, we're told
we're born to be selfish.
We're told even our
genes are selfish.
>>REGINA: Well, listen to
Richard Dawkins, right.
>>MCTAGGART: Absolutely.
We believe that we're
supposed to act selfishly
because we've been
programmed to do so.
Well, first of all,
the science shows not.
The science shows
that we feel as
good about giving as
eating and having sex.
And secondly, there's also
another thing in our brains
that's an it's not fair
button that goes off
when we're not given enough, or
even when we're given too much.
Our brains scream,
it's not fair.
So even those bankers out there.
There's something in their
brains that's saying,
it's not fair.
We're being given too much.
But as you say, there's
an equalizing mechanism.
So studies that
have shown when, you
know, where they've sort
of stacked the deck,
where somebody's getting
too much and another person
is getting too
little in the study.
Let's say it's an
employment type game.
They find that people feel
better when-- if they're
getting too much, if they
get less the next time.
And if they're not given
enough, if they're given more.
So we feel good
about equalizing.
It's there in our hard
wiring to feel good.
>>REGINA: It's like
we're seeking balance
on a psychospiritual,
emotional level.
And then there was an actual
game, the ultimatum game.
>>MCTAGGART: Well,
this is a wonderful way
of showing that we're
inherently fear.
The ultimatum game's the
simplest kind of game.
And John Nash was the person
who came up with game theory.
So these follow on.
It the ultimatum game, let's
say you and I have never met.
I'm given 10 bucks.
You're assigned to
me as my partner.
I'm never going
to meet you again.
And I'm told I can
take this 10 bucks,
and I can split it with
you in any way I want.
And if I split it with you, if
you decide to keep the split,
then we both get our
share of the money.
If you say no to it, neither
of us gets any money.
So the assumption is
that I will always
keep $9, or something like that.
And I'll give you about $1.
And even though it's
derisory, you'll
take it because something's
better than nothing.
Well, this game has been
played all around the world,
even with cultures that don't
have money, where they're
playing with tobacco, not money.
And the most common
split is 50%.
>>REGINA: Mhm.
That makes total sense to me.
>>MCTAGGART: The most
common split is 50%.
But the other interesting
thing is about fairness,
is we expect people
to be fair back.
We expect reciprocity.
And scientists have
shown this with a thing
called the public goods game.
Now in this game, let's say
we've got a group of us.
We're all given 10 bucks.
We're all told to put a certain
percentage of that money
into a pot.
And it's going to be
redistributed to all of us.
So the real secret to the game
is the more everybody puts in,
the better everybody makes out.
And initially, it's true.
Everybody is generous
usually, except maybe one
or two people who
are less generous.
So this pisses the
rest of the people off.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MCTAGGART: So in subsequent
games, they put in less.
And they put in less after that.
>>REGINA: So we start becoming
stingier ourselves in response,
because we're feeling this
lack of fairness innately.
>>MCTAGGART: Exactly, Regina.
And so ultimately, no
one puts in anything.
And that's kind of
where we are right now.
>>REGINA: Yes, I would say so.
>>MCTAGGART: We're
in a public goods
game no one wants to play.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And there was another one,
a woman named Browning.
The study she did I
found interesting,
because this is a
computer generated model,
from what I understood.
>>MCTAGGART: No, this
used one of those games.
And it was trying
to figure out what
was going to be--
in this game, it
was almost like a survival
of the fittest game.
Because what happened
was they modeled it
so that the winners of any
game, of any couple of games,
would then split their
binary code and make a baby.
And I so that super
winner would then
play other codes, essentially.
And what they found,
which was so amazing--
>>REGINA: Do you want to give
the framework for the game
itself?
Because it about
the partnership.
This particular one
was about a partnership
where you could either--
you had four options.
You can choose to go-- if
they had a man and wife,
for example, and the woman
chooses to go to the ballet.
The man chooses to go to
a bullfight, whatever.
You had a choice.
The woman could
accompany the man
to his game, what he wants to
do, whether she wants or not.
He could accompany
her to the ballet.
She could go to her own thing.
Or they could each go to the
other thing without the other,
right.
And so those are the
four variables in that.
>>MCTAGGART: And it was called
the Battle of the Sexes game.
They always have these
really funny, exotic titles.
So she modeled it.
As I say, the winners
of the different games
would then make a baby.
And then those super winners
would play each other.
And after a while,
she modeled it.
And with computer
programming, you could play--
>>REGINA: Endlessly.
>>MCTAGGART: Thousands of
these games very quickly.
She called up her thesis tutor
and said, oh my goodness.
They seem to be taking turns.
So the computer
model itself found
that cooperation was
the best outcome,
that when you took turns, when
you were fair and reciprocated,
you actually won better.
>>REGINA: And it makes sense,
just like the other one,
like the ultimatum
experiment where you can--
everyone ended up
essentially giving
each other half their money.
And that feels right.
I find even in simple
situations such as playing games
with friends, board
games, or card games.
It's fun to be in a bit of
competition, so to speak,
and doing your best.
But I can't stand it if it gets
lopsided and anybody is clearly
not winning.
>>MCTAGGART: Yeah.
>>REGINA: I don't
like the game anymore.
>>MCTAGGART: I mean,
we all have that in us.
We will have-- and
here's the reason
that it's so important, aside
from just it being the kind
and the right thing to do.
I mean, scientists
have demonstrated
that the more
unfair any society,
and they've looked at all
of the Western societies,
the more fair--
and by unfair, they
mean really a huge
disparity between income
between rich and poor and a
disparity between opportunity.
The more unfair any society,
the worse off that society
is in terms of all the
important social indicators
like education, crime,
health, mental health, all
those sorts of things.
And America, which was worked
out to be the most unfair
of all of the Western
societies, when they looked
at all those social indicators,
they found we're at the bottom.
We, the richest country in the
world, we're at the bottom.
We've got the worst
stats for education,
for health, et
cetera-- on and on.
And we're the most unfair.
So they've made that connection.
And a real interesting
one I found
was one state that had
the fewest problems in all
of the United States
was New Hampshire.
And they also found
that is the least unfair
of all of the states--
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Yeah.
>>MCTAGGART: In terms
of this disparity
between-- great disparity
between rich and poor
and opportunity.
So fairness creates a better
situation for everybody,
rich or poor.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MCTAGGART: You know, there's--
the one really interesting--
>>REGINA: And we're not talking
communism or socialism here.
We're talking about an innate,
almost cellular knowing
of fairness.
>>MCTAGGART: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
And you know, this has a really
important bearing on the rich,
too.
Because there was a study
that I've looked at that
I found really
fascinating of rich folks.
They found-- they
looked at neighborhoods.
And they wanted to
find out who were
the people who
were the most ill.
And they found
they were the rich.
The richest person on any
block is the most ill,
because they found
that person had created
a bunker mentality,
an isolated mentality.
And it was that isolation
that ultimately made him ill.
As I said earlier, that
Gary Cooper character
is the perfect candidate
for a heart attack,
because they found
this lack of belonging,
which is all about--
belonging is about connecting,
about giving, about agreeing,
about being part of,
about fairness.
You know, belonging is probably
the best drug we can take.
It not only protects us
against heart attack,
but also stroke,
even the common cold.
I mean, they found looking
at heart attack patients
that only half have
the usual risk factors.
The other half
are simply lonely.
>>REGINA: That's interesting.
Because in the past,
the statistics,
certainly in the
United States, were
that men had a much higher
degree of heart disease,
for example.
Now the women have
caught up with that.
>>MCTAGGART: Hmm.
Well, women are working
all hours, trying
to juggle all sorts
of things, don't
have the social networks
they used to have.
And so it's about belonging.
>>REGINA: It is about belonging.
Now, you talked in
the book about, again,
this essential
knowingness, the wisdom
of a group of people
for its own survival.
And in the case you
used, it was a hill tribe
around the tsunami
of 2004, which
I thought was fascinating, the
way in which the elder started
observing and noticing
the patterns of behavior.
Maybe you can share
the rest of that.
>>MCTAGGART: Well, one of the
things I wanted to look at
was how do we recover this bond.
And you know, I haven't really
defined bond in this show
so far.
But by bond, I mean connections
so integral and profound
that it's impossible
to say where
one thing ends and
another thing begins.
And that's really
what my book argues,
is that's what we are part of.
We are an intergalactic
super-organism.
And we can only understand
each other and our lives
if we live in that way.
So I asked myself,
how do we recover it?
And there were four things
I thought were important.
The first was about seeing
much more holistically.
And in the 2004 tsunami where
a quarter million people died,
four tribes watched the whole
thing from a mountaintop.
And the Westerners
were amazed by this.
If they had been
able to forecast
this what their Western,
the best Western equipment
couldn't do, and when they
actually looked at why
and they talked to these elders,
they said, how did you know?
And they said oh, simple.
The fish were
swimming a bit funny,
and the animals were
acting a little bit odd.
And you know, the wind
had changed direction.
And so we--
>>REGINA: The children
were behaving badly.
>>MCTAGGART: Yeah.
The children were
behaving badly.
And so we realized that
water was going to pull back
and hurl forward with fury.
And so that was amazing to them.
And when they looked
further at this tribe,
they found they've
actually learned
to see in a very,
very different way.
I mean, they can
swim in the water,
and they're able to
distinguish little brown clams
from little brown stones 15
yards away in the ocean bottom
without any kind of
swimming aids like goggles.
They've taught
themselves, their eyes,
to be almost like
a camera aperture.
And they've been able to see so
much more holistically, so much
more detail, than
we in the West can.
And that really has to do
with how we're trained to see.
We are trained to
be so individual.
We're trained, if
you're as old as I am,
you remember books like
"Fun With Dick and Jane."
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
I remember that.
>>MCTAGGART: And you know.
And we were taught
to see the comings
and goings of individuals.
And so ultimately, we focus on
the individual things so much
that we cannot see these subtle
connections that tie things
together.
>>REGINA: And this seems
to be one differentiating
factor socially between
many of the eastern cultures
and the west, is this sense
of belonging and family.
But even that is changing.
In fact, in Thailand, I
was there a few years ago,
and we were with some
students, American students.
And they were doing
some work in the field
of science and sociology.
And they were talking
about the fact
that there was a huge
upswing in the prescription
of antidepressant drugs
to the elder generation.
The reason being, they
now have Starbucks,
or their Wawee coffee.
And you saw the young
people in their 30s.
They had Western clothing on.
They had their Mac books
there at the coffee shops.
And the children were
leaving the hill.
They were leaving the cities
to go find their own way,
as we have done for so long.
And the family does not know how
to survive without each other
there and were rapidly falling
into a state of depression
among the elderly,
which is very, very sad.
And again, they already had
that part of the picture,
it sounds like, right.
>>MCTAGGART: Yes.
>>REGINA: But how do
you stop any kind of,
if you want to call
it progress, change
once a younger
generation has decided
it's in their best interest.
>>MCTAGGART: By showing
them that maybe it
isn't the progress.
I think, you know, there's
some wonderful happy mediums.
The whole idea that we have
is such an either or mentality
here in the West.
We think it has to be communism
or socialism, or capitalism.
We don't see that there are
all kinds of shades of gray,
you know.
There all kinds of
ways to differentiate.
We can have progress.
We can have Western mod cons.
But we can also have community.
And that's really my message.
The message of "The
Bond" is the only way
we are going to evolve as
a society, as a species,
is to understand
that we are here--
we are interconnected,
so interconnected,
and that we have to
live in that way.
We have to recreate the
kinds of close knit community
that we are programmed
to thrive in.
>>REGINA: At the same time, not
fall into only associating with
like.
Because that's the
conundrum there.
We need each other.
>>MCTAGGART: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yet at
the same time, we
cloister ourselves among
people only of like mind
and are very intolerant
to outside perceptions
within this attempt to
make ourselves feel safe.
>>MCTAGGART: Absolutely.
And that was the
next piece of how
to recover the bond I
wanted to talk about
was this whole idea of
learning to relate to people
in a different way, in a
much more holistic way.
That was the second thing I felt
was really important to wipe
out in that hard drive we have
to change in ourselves in order
to evolve is we're taught and
we now look much more for us
and revile them.
And us is becoming
smaller and smaller.
And them is becoming
bigger and bigger.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MCTAGGART: And
as you say, we look
to connect with people
who are only like us.
And that is kind of almost
a personal justification.
We want our friends to be
another I, another person.
>>REGINA: A reflection
of ourselves.
>>MCTAGGART: Exactly.
And we don't know how
to connect with people
who are not like us anymore.
And we certainly
see it in America.
We're polarizing so much
again on political grounds,
on economic grounds, on
every kind of ground.
We are really dividing
and not understanding
about bringing ourselves
together and making
the relationship the
most important thing.
And I found a really interesting
example of that in a guy
called Orland Bishop, who's
working in Watts in California.
>>REGINA: Yes.
That was beautiful.
>>MCTAGGART: You
know, and here he
is working with gang
members, rival gang members,
teaching the members of
the Crips and the Bloods,
the most notorious
gangs in America,
how you relate to each
other in wholeness.
Talk about a fool's errand.
But he's succeeding.
Because he's
teaching them methods
of getting past
those differences
to connect on a
deeper soul level
by sharing deeply about
themselves and finding that,
even though they have
differences of beliefs,
they have common values.
>>REGINA: And he asked them
really probing questions
to get them to open up
in front of each other,
I mean deeply personal.
I think it was
something like what
was the event that
essentially helped
you come to the conclusion
your life was not going
to be what you had
hoped it would be.
>>MCTAGGART: Exactly.
>>REGINA: These interrupting,
often traumatic events.
This really brought
out some, well,
vulnerability and
humility in these kids.
>>MCTAGGART: Exactly.
And that became the glue
that connected people.
But that kind of deep sharing
from the heart is so powerful.
I mean, it's brought
together people
who are very polarized, like
pro-life, pro-choice people.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
And also the story
of the old Germans
that went back and revisited
their history in Belarus.
That was an amazing story.
>>MCTAGGART: This
was an amazing story.
A batch of Germans
went back to Belarus
to help with some of the
rebuilding after Chernobyl.
And this had been-- these were
people who had been in the war.
So of course, they had been
on the side of the Nazis.
And they had created a
lot of destruction there.
So they wanted to
try to make amends.
So they were doing that.
And they were with
their host one night.
And one of the old Germans
stood up and he said,
he wanted to toast his host.
And he said, I wanted to say
this must never happen again.
And he started talking.
And he just began to sob.
>>REGINA: And he had spent
time in a Russian camp.
>>MCTAGGART: He
had been in a camp.
And he had felt
sorry for himself.
But he started just
thinking of the destruction
his country had wreaked
on this country.
And he began to sob.
And at that point, an old
woman, an old Belarusian woman,
came over and hugged
him and kissed him.
It's like that
expression of real sorrow
and real repentance
and an opening up
of really speaking
from the heart
crosses and creates a
situation of forgiveness
that nothing else can.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And the thing is, when you're
in a competitive society like
the societies of the West,
you don't-- you feel you have
to protect your
turf at all costs,
especially your
internal emotional turf.
And so people, at all
costs, avoid that kind
of really intimate
disclosure and weakness
in front of others.
We have to let that go.
>>MCTAGGART: Absolutely.
And when we do,
when we understand
you don't have to agree,
but when you share,
you make that connection.
I mean, there was a
wonderful situation
of pro-life and
pro-choice women.
After some shootings
in Planned Parenthood,
the leaders of
both sides decided
they had to come together.
And they began
meeting in secret.
And they learned
how to share deeply
to stop demonizing the other
and to value the connection.
And at the end of a few years,
they held a press conference.
And the press, of course, said
to them, so who won the debate?
And they said well, no one.
In the act of sharing so
deeply, we-- both sides
felt more firmly in
what they believe.
And so they said oh,
it was a failure then.
They said, no, no.
Because when there've been
threats on Planned Parenthood,
it's been the
pro-life people who
warned the pro-choice people.
But now, of course,
we go out together.
We party together.
We love each other.
We look after each
other's children.
We love each other.
And it's that, that
power of deep sharing,
that becomes the bridge
across the fence.
>>REGINA: So now with the
time we have remaining,
we need to start looking at the
how to, the mechanics of it,
the solutions.
Because the last part
of your book is really
dedicated to this.
And I want to take
your lead on this.
Because there's a
lot to go through
in a short amount of time.
But how do we
begin, first of all,
creating this larger vision
of wholeness and this dialogue
that brings us into this deep
compassion for one another,
so we can even begin to reform
the society on this level.
>>MCTAGGART: OK.
Well, there are four things
that we need to do, I feel.
All of us, even the
most spiritual of us,
have this hard drive
that's been programmed
with I win, you
lose individualism,
individualistic competitiveness.
That has to be wiped clean.
The first thing has
to be this whole idea
of seeing much
more holistically.
And in the book, I
talk a lot about-- I
provide a whole bunch of
exercises to show people
how to learn to
see on many levels,
seeing with the gut
hunch, seeing the unseen,
seeing watching
people on many levels,
seeing without
judgment, understanding.
As I write in the
book about Don Beck,
who invented spiral dynamics,
and who has been very much
involved as a peace keeper.
He helped both the black
people and the white people
before the end of
apartheid in South Africa
by showing the white
people, for instance,
that the tribes
were not all alike,
that there were lots of
different shades of gray,
different shades of belief.
And that-- being
able to see that
and to see with much more
detail about other people,
and to distinguish different
belief systems, is important.
So there are many things, as I
say, I have on just exercises,
learning to see the
whole that are important.
Learning to relate very
differently, that's number two.
We talked a little bit about
sharing deeply, understanding
and valuing, because
we've lost this a lot.
The whole idea of changing
what a relationship is for.
A relationship is
about the connection.
It's not about agreeing.
It's not about finding
another I in that person.
It's about connection.
And I have a lot of exercises
in the book about how
to connect with people
who are not like you,
how to value that connection
above anything else,
and how to learn to find
the connection, even
among all of this other belief
stuff that's so different.
If you're a Republican, you
can find common values even
in somebody who's a Democrat.
If somebody's a rabid
Republican and somebody's
a rabid Democrat,
I guarantee you,
you still have mostly
the same beliefs.
You have mostly the same values.
You still love
God, in most cases.
You still love your
family and children.
You still want to fix the roads
and fix the infrastructure.
And you still want to
balance the budget.
We have lots of similar things.
And it's training yourself
to find those common values
underneath the different
beliefs and systems.
So getting past that.
The third thing I talk
about is really important,
the whole idea of the
superordinate goal.
And by that, that's a big word
for meaning coming together
for a common goal.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MCTAGGART: It was
illustrated so perfectly
in a study called the Robber's
Cave Experiment, where
scientists took a bunch
of 12-year-old boys,
put them in two buses,
sent them to summer camp,
and had them create identities
for themselves, separate places
to sleep, and engaged them
in highly competitive games.
And the camp
counselors in this case
were all psychologists
in disguise.
And the kids, after a while,
were killing each other.
They were ripping up
each other's flags.
They were beating each other up.
They hated each other.
So then the counselors
got them together
to work together for
some common goals.
They created a series
of crises in the camp.
Put an impediment
in the water supply.
Boys had to work together
to get rid of it.
Truck in the ditch, had to work
together to get rid of th--
bring it out of the ditch.
And lo and behold,
miracles happened.
The boys began to eat
together, chat together,
befriend each other.
And by the end of this
session, this summer camp,
they unanimously voted to
ride home on the bus together.
What he really talked about, the
psychologist and the scientist
who did the study,
invented this whole idea
of superordinate
goal, coming together
for a common goal,
barn building.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MCTAGGART: That is such a
powerful thing in a community,
coming together to work
together for a common goal.
Because when people work
together for a common goal,
their brain waves start
working in synchrony.
We start resonating as one.
And that's something I'm working
on a lot in little groups,
intention groups, watching how
when people intend together,
a group of eight or 12.
I call it the power of eight.
They begin resonating
in synchrony.
Not only does the person seem
to get better that they're
sending intention to, but all
of the people in the group
become a virtuous circle.
They also find they
are feeling better.
They feel more connected.
And in many cases, they are
also healed in some way.
And they're permanently
changed, because they
feel this connection, this
palpable sense of oneness.
>>REGINA: And it is.
It's all about, as you say,
it's the connection itself.
And there was a wonderful
metaphor about music being more
about the space
between the notes.
And it's the same with us.
It's that connectivity
between the individuals
that makes life worth living.
And we only have a
few seconds left.
If you have any one
final comment to make,
I'd love to hear it.
>>MCTAGGART: Really
important to understand, now
that we're so frightened
about what's going on,
is that you can be
the change agent.
In "The Bond," I
talk a lot about how
tiny actions, even leaving
your change in a Coke machine,
which one woman did, changed the
whole culture of her business.
It reminded her
company of generosity.
And when generosity
is the currency,
the game starts changing.
>>REGINA: Absolutely, Lynne.
Thank you so much
for being with us.
And I have to say, she's
made a beautiful case
for choosing cooperation.
I highly recommend
reading "The Bond."
As I said before,
it's a must read,
even forming a group of
eight around it if you can.
Meanwhile, you might
also enjoy our interviews
with Howard Martin
and Bruce Lipton who
also touch on these
subjects very closely.
Until tell next time, thank
you for joining us here
on Gaiam TV.